My name is Luke the Hiesterman.
I'm here to talk to you today about
storing documents in iCloud using iOS 5.
This is going to be an
introduction to the new API that
we're introducing in iOS 5,
UI Document and UI Kit.
So I'm going to start by telling you
about what we're going to cover today.
There's going to be four
sections to this talk.
Number one is figuring out what is the
problem space that we want to solve.
[Transcript missing]
Document-based applications are things
that you might find in the iWorks suite,
applications like Pages
and Keynote and Numbers.
These are documents that--or these are
applications that present data to the
user in a format that they can open it,
make changes,
and persist those changes to disk,
things that you might think
of as files on Mac OS X.
Of course, we don't really present
files to the user on iOS,
but it's that same concept.
Now, some of you maybe have never built a
document-based application for iOS.
And if you're thinking about
building your first one,
there are some challenges that
are inherent to building any
document-based application.
Let's talk about what some of those are.
First and foremost,
any document-based application
has to figure out how it's
going to do saving and opening,
how it's going to read
and write its data.
There are two basic answers to this
question that any application can have.
Number one is doing reading
and writing on the main thread.
This has the advantage of
giving you pretty simple code.
You'll probably be able
to write it quickly.
You'll be able to easily
understand what it does.
And you'll be able to maintain it easily.
The unfortunate side effect of this
approach is that if reading or writing
takes a non-trivial amount of time,
then your application is going
to block user interaction.
While the main thread is hung
writing or reading to or from disk,
then the user can't
interact with the phone.
They may be trying to push buttons or
interact with your content in some way,
but they can't do that because your
application is busy on the main
thread writing or reading data.
So the solution to this,
answer number two to how to
handle saving and opening,
is using concurrency.
If your application does reading
or writing in the background using
concurrent threads or queues,
then it frees up the main thread
so that the user can get the
experience that they really want,
which is to be able to continue
to interact with their phone.
I mean, that's very important on iOS.
We don't ever want a phone
where the user can be pushing
buttons and nothing happens.
So dealing with concurrency
allows you to solve this problem,
but it has the unfortunate side effect
of now your code is more complex.
It's probably going to
take you longer to write,
it won't be as easy to understand,
and it'll be more error-prone.
But once you've solved these
problems or figured out what
your answer is going to be,
you still have to figure out,
when should I save?
This is an interesting question on
iOS because we like to have what
we call a saveless user model.
That is to say,
we don't like to have a user model
that's not going to be able to save.
We like to have save buttons on iOS.
Rather, the user simply interacts
with their content,
and as they make changes to the data,
we just give them the illusion
that it's always persisted to disk,
and they don't have to think
about when they should save.
It's always saved.
So some of you maybe have actually
already given answers to these questions.
You've written applications
that have solved these problems,
and you're here wondering,
should I adopt UI Document in iOS 5?
I think the answer to that
question is going to be yes.
That hinges largely on the
fact that we have this cool
little new feature in iOS 5,
and we call that iCloud.
And more than that,
we actually have this really
big new feature in iOS 5,
and we call that iCloud.
UI Document is built to make your
applications have documents that
seamlessly integrate with iCloud.
If you already have a
Document application,
you're going to want to bring it
over to use UI Document so that you
can take advantage of our built-in
integration to iCloud that doesn't
require any special code on your part.
Now, iCloud introduces some new
challenges that didn't exist before
in document-based application.
We'll talk about three
of those right now.
Number one is any document-based
application needs to be able to respond
to updates that come from the cloud.
At any time,
iCloud may sync some new change that
your document didn't previously have.
And if your document is open,
the user interface needs to be
immediately updated so that the user
sees the new state of the document
that just came down from the cloud.
Number two,
your document-based application needs
to do reading and writing in a way
that is safe relative to the cloud.
Because updates can come
from the cloud at any time,
and likewise,
we can take your data that is on disk
and sync it to the cloud at any time,
we have an iCloud syncing daemon that
needs to have access to the file that
your document represents at any time,
and likewise, your application needs to
have access to that file.
And so,
we need to mediate the iCloud syncing
daemon and your application's access
to the file in a way that is safe.
And thirdly,
applications in iCloud need to
figure out how to discover conflicts.
Conflicts can come at any time because
we always have the possibility that
somebody makes simultaneous changes
or we have a device that goes offline,
makes some conflicting
changes come back online.
Applications need to be able
to discover conflicts so that
they can begin the process of
conflict recovery and resolution.
So we're going to spend the next
50 minutes or so talking about our
solution to all of these problems,
which is UI Document.
And the really great news is
UI Document solves all of these
problems that we've just talked about.
UI Document handles concurrent
reading and writing for you in a way
that doesn't make your code complex.
It has a built-in autosaving
engine that allows you to get a
save this user model for free.
And it has, of course,
built-in iCloud integration.
So let's jump into
section two of our talk,
which is the basics of UI document.
I'd like first to introduce you to
what it is that UI Document provides.
UI Document is, at its heart,
a model base class that represents
a document in your application.
Now that means you're not
going to instantiate direct
instances of UI document.
Rather, you're going to be
subclassing from UI document,
and you will be creating instances
of your document subclasses.
So what the base class, UIDocument,
brings along with it is a few
key document handling features.
Among those three are number one,
concurrent background
reading and writing.
I mentioned this before.
This is very nice that we take all
of the work of reading and writing
concurrency out of your hands,
doing it for you,
so that you get to have the simple code
that only works on the main thread.
You don't ever have to deal
with concurrency yourself.
But you get the best user
interaction scenario,
because the main thread
will never be blocked,
making it so that the user
can't deal with their content.
Number two,
we have a saveless user model.
So we will run the
autosaving engine for you.
All we're gonna ask is that you
tell us when the user makes changes,
and we'll do everything for you
in terms of ensuring that those
changes are saved at the important
times when they need to be saved.
And finally, as I mentioned before,
we have iCloud integration.
Let's look at UIManagedDocument
for just a second.
This is the one concrete subclass
that we provide of UIDocument.
This is something provided
with CoreData in mind,
and it has a few nice features if
you want a concrete subclass of
UIDocument to get started right away.
Number one, it has CoreData integration.
So if you have a CoreData stack
in your application already,
or you're considering representing
your model with CoreData,
that works great if you
have large amounts of data.
I encourage that,
and that's integrated directly
into UIManagedDocument.
UIManaged Document is
optimized for iCloud syncing.
This is particularly why it's good
to think about adopting UIManaged
Document in Core Data if you
have large amounts of data that
your document is dealing with.
And finally,
UIManaged Document has automatic
conflict resolution built in.
We're going to be talking
later more about dealing with
conflicts and conflict resolution,
and it'll start to become apparent
why it's actually really nice to have
somebody do conflict resolution for you.
and UI Managed Document does that.
So I'd like to take a second to
look at the architecture that your
Document application is going to
have if you're using UI Document.
So you're probably all familiar with
the Model-View-Controller paradigm.
It's going to be the same thing here.
Your application is probably
going to have a UIView controller
that will represent the
controller of your application.
And then it's going to have a UIView
that that view controller will own.
And that view is going to
display your data to the user.
And then you're also
going to have a model.
And that model is going to
be your UIDocument subclass.
We actually refer to this as a
model controller because it's
going to encapsulate the model
that your document represents.
And so we're going to be focusing
on that UIDocument subclass,
building that model controller today.
So let's jump into reading and writing,
what that is.
I want to hit one more time.
We've talked about that all reading
and writing happens on a background
queue managed by UIDocument for you.
Reading is triggered by an open
operation or by a revert operation,
which can happen when a change
comes in from the cloud.
Writing is triggered when we save.
Saving most of the time will
be initiated by UIDocument as a
part of our autosaving mechanism.
And both of these operations,
reading and writing,
have automatic handling for a
couple of built-in data types.
Those data types are
NSData and NSFileWrapper.
These correspond respectively to
having a flat file or a file package.
NSData will be used if your
file is represented in the
file system as a flat file.
But if you have a file package,
we'll use NSFileWrapper.
A file package,
for those of you who don't know,
is a directory that
contains several files,
but that is treated,
from the user's perspective,
as a single file.
And we wrap that all up in NSFileWrapper.
It's just a moment of an aside.
If you haven't thought about using
file packages in NSFileWrapper before,
I will encourage you to look into
them and consider adopting them,
especially if you have an
application that stores a lot
of data as part of its document.
They have optimizations such as faster
writing if you're only writing one or
a couple of files in the FileWrapper,
and likewise,
more efficient syncing to iCloud
if you're only modifying certain
files within the FileWrapper.
So with that,
let's take a closer look at reading.
Thank you.
We have two queues as
part of our reading.
The one that the reading is initiated on,
and the background queue
that's managed by UIKit.
Probably the only one you're going
to care about is the main queue,
the queue that you'll be calling us on.
And reading begins by you
asking us to open the document.
Often this will be immediately after
you've initialized the document,
you'll ask us to open it.
And that's done by calling
open with completion handler.
It takes a block parameter
that is the completion handler.
we'll invoke at the end
of the open operation.
When you ask us to open a document,
we will go immediately into
the background queue and
begin the reading operation.
You see that reading sort
of takes a long time,
potentially, and that's why we do it
in the background queue,
so that we're not blocking the main
thread while this is happening.
At some point,
the read operation will complete,
and we will come back to the queue
that you called us on and ask
you to load the contents that we
just read into your data model.
This is where we provide the one
override point that you will need to
facilitate reading in your application,
and that override point is load
from contents of type with an
error return by indirection.
As I said, this is your one override
point that you will want to
implement to make reading happen.
And the contents that we
send you is an id parameter.
And that will be either
an NSData instance or an
NSFile wrapper instance.
If your file is represented
on disk as a flat file,
we will send you NSData.
If it is represented on
disk as a file package,
we wrap that up in an NSFile
wrapper instance and send you that.
Whatever your contents is,
you can load that into your data
model at that time and likely
update what the user sees as well.
After you're done loading
the contents and you return,
we will invoke the completion
handler that was passed into the
open with completion handler method,
and that finishes the reading operation.
So writing is pretty much the same thing,
kind of in reverse.
Again,
we're dealing with the same two queues,
the one that the writing
operation is initiated on,
and the queue managed by UIKit to
do the actual writing to disk.
Writing begins with a save operation,
and that's the method
saveToURL for saveOperation,
and that also takes a
block completion handler.
Most often,
you're just going to let this get called
for you because UIDocument will call
this as part of our autosaving engine.
And you've simply told
us about the changes,
and we'll do autosaving.
But you will call this if
you're creating a new file.
So once save is called,
we will immediately turn back to you now
on the same queue that save is invoked
and ask you to snapshot your data model.
So what this means is we need
a representation of what your
model is right now that we're
going to go write to disk.
And this is your one override point to
facilitate writing in your application.
And that override point is contents for
type with an error return by indirection.
Now, this has an id return value.
And again,
if you deal in the built-in supported
types of NSData or NSFileWrapper,
then you're done if you return
us an NSData or an NSFileWrapper,
because we know how to
write those types to disk.
And we'll just go do it.
If you want to return a custom--
So,
in order to use the new UIDocument class,
you have to use the new UIDocument class.
And then when we're done,
we'll invoke the completion handler that
was passed to savedURL back on the queue
on which that operation was initiated.
And that's writing.
So reading and writing,
the big key here is each one
just has a single override point.
One for reading,
which is load from contents of type,
and one for writing,
which is contents for type.
Just by implementing these two methods,
you will have reading and writing based
on UI Document in your application,
and it will all happen in the background,
so you'll get the best user experience.
After that, all we need to do to make our
application feel full-fledged
is make autosaving happen.
And autosaving is all about you telling
us about the document's changes.
When the user makes
edits to the document,
you want to tell us about them so we can
figure out when to schedule autosaving
and make that happen at the right time.
So there are two ways that you
can tell us about--two easy ways
that the user has made changes.
Number one is simply
to take that user edit,
turn around and call a
method on UIDocument,
updateChangeCount.
This tells us that, hey,
a change has been made.
We can go schedule autosaving
at an appropriate time.
Alternatively, if you are supporting undo
in your document application,
then you can simply register
your change with the undo manager
that is built into UIDocument.
There's a property on
UIDocument called undoManager,
and you can register your
change with that undo manager,
and if you do so, we will notice that you
registered that change,
and we will call
updateChangeCount on your behalf.
So it's the same amount of
code that you have to write if
you're going to support undo.
Simply register your change
with the undo manager,
and that also tells us that you've
made a change to the document.
Either way, now we're good,
and our autosaving engine can
take over from there and ensure
that the user's data is persistent
to disk at the appropriate time.
So that's pretty much it as far as
what you need to know to go write a
document application that can open,
save, and in fact autosave
just with a few APIs.
And so I'd like to show you just how
little code and just how easy it is
to go get started right now building
an application based on UI Document.
So the application that I'm
going to show you today is
something that I call Cloud Notes,
a very simple text document-based
application that actually gives
the user the opportunity to sync
their documents into iCloud.
And this is my UIDocument subclass we
see in front of us called NoteDocument.
And you see I just have two
methods here that I'm overriding.
Load from contents to do my reading
and contents for type to do my writing.
And with a little simple code in there,
that will be all I need
for my document subclass.
So I'll start with load from contents.
I'm past the contents parameter,
which in my case is going to be
an NSData instance representing
the contents of my flat text file,
since I'm just dealing
with text note files.
When I get that,
I'm just going to literally
load that into my data model.
My data model is simply a
string Ivar represented by
the document text property.
So I'll take that
contents as an NSData and
Go ahead and set that to
my document text model,
locking in a string
with that data contents.
And I'll deal also with the other
possible case that I have an empty file,
so I got empty contents from that.
And if that's the case,
I'll set my model to
be an empty NSString.
After I've loaded my model,
one thing that I want to do is let
my view controller know that my
model has been updated because,
well,
I'm going to want to update the view
in response to updating my model.
So for this document class,
I actually created a delegate method that
allows me to inform the view controller
that my contents have been updated.
And I'll just go ahead and call that.
I call noteDocumentContentsUpdated
so my view controller knows,
"Hey, my contents have changed.
You should take the new model and
update the view." And with that,
I'm done with load from contents,
and I can just return that, yes, I have,
in fact, loaded from contents.
And turn my attention
to contents for type.
In Contents for Type,
I'm just going to do effectively
the reverse of what I just
did in Load from Contents.
I'm going to take my model,
which is just a string in this case,
and wrap it up in an NSData and
return it to the document.
So a little operation that I'm
going to do before that is handle
the case that I have an empty model
right now that my text is zero,
has a zero length.
And in that case,
I'm going to put some base data
in my document because I don't
like to save empty documents.
I like to have some base data in there.
And so I'm just going to put
the new note text into my model.
Now, that done, I just take my model,
which is my document text,
and wrap it up in an
NSData using data with bytes
and return that to the document.
It will take my data instance
and handle writing it to disk.
And everything is done.
In this one screen,
you see all the code I'm going to
write for my Document subclass,
minus some comments at the
top that say "created by me."
So I'm going to turn my
attention for the last bit to
the view controller that I have.
I'm going to implement just a couple of
methods here that are delegate methods.
One is the method that I just sent
from my document saying that the
document contents are updated,
note document contents updated.
We use this as an opportunity
to update my document's view.
So that's simply a matter
of taking the model data,
which is a string,
and putting it into my view.
My view is a UI text view,
so I can just take the
string from my model,
put it in the text view,
and that will be all I need.
for no document contents updated.
And the other method,
the last method I want to implement,
is a delegate method for the UI TextView.
TextView did change.
And this is my opportunity
to do the reverse operation
here from the ViewController2.
That is, when the user makes an
edit to the TextView,
I will get this message.
And I want to update my model,
and then also tell the document
that I have updated my model.
So a couple lines of code
here to make that happen.
I update the model by setting
the document text to the
new text of the text view.
And then the last thing I need
to do is just tell the document
that I have updated the model.
This is the key to facilitating
autosaving so that we know
a change has been done.
And I just call update
change count on the document.
Now I probably could use
an undo manager here.
My users probably wish
I used an undo manager.
That will be version
1.1 of my application.
And that would call update
change count for me.
But for now,
I've done update change count.
So that's all the code
I'm going to write.
So, to show you this app in action,
this application is--
just a text-based application that
will give us a list of documents that
are text documents that we can read,
make changes to,
and enjoy their auto-saving.
My application should be
launching in just a second here.
Xcode says it's running.
OK.
So here's my list of documents.
I've only got two in this particular app.
And they're just text documents,
but I can make changes to them.
And this is just a list of
books that I want to read.
Say maybe I want to
read Huck Finn as well.
I'll go ahead and make that change.
add that to my list.
I can go look at my other document.
Remember, oh, I definitely need to get
bacon when I go home.
And I switch back to my other document.
And my content is still there because,
well, I told the document that I made a
change and it auto-saved it for me.
So I didn't have to do anything.
When I reopened the document,
my content is there for me.
It was auto-saved.
And that's great.
There's one other little nicety
to this application that I didn't
even have to write any code for
that I'd like to show you now.
And that's that I have another instance
of this application on my phone.
And maybe I want to
make a change to that.
Maybe I want to remember that I want to
read the book at home when I get home.
So I'm going to make
that change on my phone.
And--
It's going to auto save on
my phone after it saves.
It's going to sync up to iCloud.
iCloud is going to sync
it down to my iPad.
And when that happens,
you'll see that my iPad just updates.
And you know what my
favorite part of that is?
I didn't write any code to do that.
UI Document did that for me.
All I did was implement
the reading method,
and Document knew when I had
to reread the document because
it was updated in iCloud,
and I'm done.
So that's really just how easy it
is to get started writing document
applications and even having them
be ready to integrate with iCloud.
I should mention--
that you do need to individually set,
in the real world,
documents to sync to iCloud
via NS File Manager APIs.
So you set individually the document
to be ubiquitous and to sync to iCloud.
In this case,
I had done that beforehand in this demo,
so full disclosure,
I had said these documents
should be syncing.
But once you do that, once you use the
NS File Manager APIs to say these
documents should sync to iCloud,
then UIDoctument is fully ready
to do the right thing for you and
make your application syncable.
So that's how easy it is.
Let's move to section three of our talk,
which is handling conflicts
and errors in UI Document.
Unfortunately,
with any document-based application,
there's always the possibility
of things going wrong.
We can't just guarantee that
life is going to be peaches
and roses all the time,
because, well, hey,
maybe your disk is full
and you can't write.
Or maybe a conflict occurs in the cloud.
And we can't just guarantee
that these things won't happen.
But what we can do is try to give our
users the most graceful experience when
those unfortunate things do happen.
So that's what we're
going to talk about now.
Now, what UIDocument provides for you to
help make this a little easier is a
property called DocumentState that you
can observe to know when the documents
in various states that tell you about
when the user's changes are being safely
So the document state tells you
about that information of how safe
it is to let the user make changes.
And we'll be observing this
property through a notification,
which is
UIDocumentStateChangedNotification.
And you'll probably register for this
notification in your view controller.
This is because responding to
DocumentStateChanges is all about
giving feedback to the user.
The user is going to want to know
if we're having a problem saving,
for example,
and their data isn't being persisted
to disk as their normal illusion of,
"Hey,
I just make changes and they're persisted
for me." So we want to let them know
when we're in those interesting states.
Let's talk about what
those document states are.
Most of the time,
your document is just going to
be in UIDocumentStateNormal.
And this means, well, everything's fine.
User changes are being persisted
to disk as they would expect.
Everything's hunky dory.
They make changes.
We save them.
Life is good.
There are four other states
that the document may be in,
and we'll talk about those
and what they mean right now.
Number one is state closed.
This is the initial state of the
document when--after you initialize it.
It will remain in this state until
you successfully open the document or
you save if you're creating a file.
And obviously,
the user probably isn't making
changes when the document is closed.
But we're certainly not
autosaving or anything like that,
it's a closed document.
The second state we can be
in is the conflict state.
This state is set when we
discover a conflict in iCloud,
and this gives you the opportunity
to let the user know that,
hey, there is a conflict,
and you may want to resolve it.
We'll talk about initiating the conflict
resolution process in a little bit.
Number three is saving error.
This means...
The last time we tried
to save the document,
it wasn't successful for some reason.
There was an error.
We want to let the user know that, hey,
your data actually isn't being persisted
to disk in a safe fashion right now.
And they're probably going
to want to know about that.
Number four is editing state disabled.
This is the only one of the states
that is explicitly disallowed to
let the user make changes to the
document while we're in this state.
If we're in a saving error
state or a conflict state,
for example,
you might let the user continue
to interact with the document,
especially in a conflict state.
They may choose to continue
to make changes and deal
with that conflict later.
But in an editing state disabled
or state editing disabled,
we're telling you that it is
actually not safe right now
to let the user make changes.
An example might be when
we revert the document.
While we're in the middle
of a revert operation,
we know that any changes at the moment
are just going to be thrown out as
soon as we complete this revert.
So it just doesn't make sense
to allow them to make changes.
So let's revisit the document
application architecture
that we saw at the beginning.
And we focused mostly on the UI document
and building our model controller so far.
We're going to take a moment
to focus on the view controller
for this portion of the talk,
because as I said before,
this is all about providing
feedback to the user.
So some user interface that says, hey,
the document's in an abnormal state.
That's what this is all about.
So let's walk through what we might
do to respond to a saving error.
You start by registering for the
document state change notification.
You'll do that on your view controller,
because your view controller is going
to want to provide UI in response.
We'll call this with the saving
error state set if an error occurs.
And your response to that is
going to want to be to show
some non-modal UI to the user,
indicating that they're in this state.
The key here really is non-modal,
because what we don't want is just
popping modal alerts in the user's face.
Particularly considering
autosaving and things,
we could have repeated errors,
and we don't want UI alert
views popping up repeatedly,
yelling at the user, telling them, hey,
there is an error.
We get it.
We want to communicate this to the user,
but we don't want to yell it at them.
So non-modal UI is the key.
And we'll show you an example,
maybe some food for thought,
of what this means in just a little bit.
I'd like to talk about
conflict resolution.
Conflict resolution, of course,
is a little bit new for iOS 5.
But it's this world we are now
going to live in with iCloud where,
hey, we've got multiple devices
around that all may be making
changes relative to each other,
and those could sink to the
cloud and cause conflicts.
So there's always the possibility that
I took my iPad on the plane with me,
and while I was there I decided, eh,
I want to add something
to my grocery list.
I want to make sure we get mustard.
But at the same time that I've done that,
my aunt Edna, who's coming to pick
me up from the airport,
added ketchup to the grocery list.
She thought we needed ketchup.
And then when I get off the
plane and get internet again,
our changes both try to
sink up to the cloud,
and we have these conflicting changes.
We have mustard and ketchup.
Well, which one should it be?
I don't know.
We have to solve this in some way.
But the key to this story is you can't
make your users not go on planes,
not go offline.
And thus potentially
make conflicting changes,
or even just make changes simultaneously
on two devices if they're like that.
So what I want you to be thinking
right now is if you're wondering
whether your application needs to
have a conflict resolution strategy,
the answer to this is if you are
going to integrate to iCloud,
yes, you must have a conflict
resolution strategy,
because it can happen,
and if your users have multiple devices,
odds are maybe at some
point it probably will.
So we're going to talk a little bit in
a bit about how you're going to do that,
but first of all,
finding out that there is a conflict
is pretty similar to finding
out that there's a saving error.
You're going to get that notified via
the document state change notification,
and in this case we'll have
the state in conflict set.
Once that happens,
you'll turn around and you can
look at the conflict versions
that exist via NSFileVersion APIs.
And after you execute some sort
of conflict resolution strategy,
you will then potentially revert
the contents of the document
if you've changed the on-disk
representation of the file.
For example,
if you've done a merge or you've
copied some other version into
being the current version,
then you'll need to revert the
document so that we get what we see on
screen equal to what you put on desk.
So let's talk about how we can actually
think about resolving some conflict.
What are some strategies
that we can employ?
And there are a few of them.
Number one, this is my personal favorite,
if you can do it.
And that's automatic merging.
And that is taking the changes
that the user made in different
places and bringing them together
in a way that makes sense for
your document without having to--
Bring in any user interaction.
You just figure out what
makes sense and do it.
In the case of the ketchup mustard
incident that I showed to you before,
what the application probably
should have done is said,
hey, one person wants ketchup,
one person wants mustard.
You know,
our final version of the document should
just have ketchup and mustard both in it.
It doesn't make sense for all documents,
but for some it certainly does,
and if you can do it, do it.
Another solution not so good is
just take the latest version.
Maybe this makes sense for your document.
What that is is when
iCloud picks a winner,
a conflict winner,
and makes that the current version,
you can just say, okay, yeah,
I like that,
and turn around and say all of the
conflict loser versions that exist
out there are--I don't need them.
Just mark them as resolved.
That's part of the NSFile version API.
You can just say, hey,
this version is resolved.
and just be done with that.
It has a downside of potentially
appearing to the user as a data loss,
because if my mustard version,
for example, was declared by iCloud as
the loser and you just go,
mark it resolved and don't tell
me about it and it goes away,
well,
I don't know what happened to my mustard.
But at least it's better than nothing,
because if you don't at least
mark conflict versions as resolved
and have some sort of conflict
resolution strategy that way,
you effectively introduce a leak,
a data leak, into the user's iCloud
account and onto their device,
because the conflict loser version stick
around until they're marked as resolved.
So that's why it's really
bad to just do nothing.
You don't want these conflict
versions sitting around forever.
We've got to do something.
Another naive approach is, well,
just prompt the user.
Maybe you don't know how
to merge the changes.
That can be OK.
That makes sense sometimes.
And if you don't know, you just say, hey,
user, I've got a conflict.
Sorry that happened,
but can you let me know
what I should do about this?
And you provide some UI that allows
the user to do manual merging or pick
a version that they want to keep.
Whatever it is,
give the user a chance to do that.
The last solution I have in
mind today is a nice easy one,
and I mentioned it earlier.
Let's just use UIManagedDocument.
UIManagedDocument, as I said before,
has built-in conflict resolution for you.
So if you just adopt CoreData and
use the UIManagedDocument class,
this is done for you.
Nice, easy day.
Conflict resolution is not your problem.
So consider using that if it makes sense,
and you can learn more about that
in What's New in CoreData on iOS,
which was talked about yesterday.
If you missed that,
we post videos online for a reason.
So to give you an example
of this kind of thing,
I'd like to talk about what we can
do to the Cloud Notes application
that I already showed you to
employ some of these ideas.
So what we want to do is add some
UI to express the state of the
document to the user in Cloud Notes.
So what I am adding
here is a little light.
In my application above my content,
in this case it's a green
light that tells the user,
hey, green light,
your document is in the normal state.
This is reflective of your
document's state normal.
And whatever you're doing,
making changes,
they'll be automatically saved to disk.
Everything is A-OK.
Good times for the user.
Okay.
So, if I encounter a saving error,
I can non-modally just turn my light
to a red light and add the text,
"Saving error," or unsaved, yeah,
unsaved.
And that tells my document, "Hey,
this document isn't
saved." That's not normal,
because I normally just expect my data
always to be saved and always persisted.
But it's certainly good to know that,
hey, I'm in this state, and, you know,
maybe it's interactive for you,
maybe the user can tap on that
and get some more information.
But the real key here is that I didn't
pop up a modal alert in the user's face.
I just gave them some kind
of non-modal feedback that,
hey, we're in a state where we actually
aren't persisting to disk.
Another case would be we
discovered that a conflict,
the conflict--the in-conflict
state was set on our document.
And what I do here is just turn
this to a yellow light and put a
"Resolve conflicts" button on there.
I've decided to employ the prompt the
user approach for this application.
And so I'm letting the user know that,
hey, we're in a conflict state.
You can actually continue
to make changes if you want.
Just continue to interact
with the document.
When you decide, "Hey,
I want to resolve those conflicts,"
they can tap the button.
I'll show them some UI that
allows them to manually merge
the conflicts or pick a version,
whatever they think the
final version should be.
I will then make sure that's saved and
revert the contents of the document.
So that's the polish that we would
want to add to our application to
get it to that level where it's
ready to ship to the App Store.
We've not only done opening and saving
and we've enabled the auto-saving
engine by telling the document
about the changes we've made,
but we've also added support to our
document to handle when things might
go wrong and make sure that the user
is protected and is going to have
a relatively graceful experience no
matter what happens with our document.
So we have some time now to
delve into the advanced concepts
that exist in UI Document.
This is going to be a relatively brief
overview to give you an idea of what's
out there to gain more fine control,
more fine-grained control
over UI Document and really
affect how it behaves.
What I want to reiterate before
we get into this is that we've
provided some really simple API for
you that is what we've discussed
up to this point in the talk that
really just should be everything you
need to go ship your application.
And I only encourage you to go looking
at these fine-grained hooks that
we're giving you if you find that your
application really has some specialized
need that just isn't fulfilled by
the API that we've shown thus far.
And if that's the case, okay.
I will send you to the docs.
That's after this talk because
we don't have much time to
talk about advanced things,
but we'll do what we can.
So let's revisit the
queue model that we had.
For reading, it looked like this.
We initiated opening
on the calling queue.
We went and did reading on a
UIKit managed background queue,
and then loaded the contents
and executed the completion
handler on the calling queue.
Writing similar.
We're doing snapshotting on
the main queue after saving,
writing that in the background,
and executing a completion
handler on the main queue.
We're going to focus for the next
few minutes on things that exist
in the UIKit background queue,
and what you can do to
call into that queue,
to initiate specialized operations,
or to override methods that get
executed in that background queue.
So there are a couple of considerations
that you'll want to keep in mind
if you're delving into this area.
One is, if you're overriding
any of these methods,
you need to be aware that, hey,
I'm dealing with something
on a concurrent queue,
and so my code that I'm writing in one of
these overrides needs to be thread safe.
That's the simple thing.
It gets actually more complex
when we're talking about calling
into one of these methods.
There are a couple of things you need
to do if you call into one of our
background reading or writing methods.
Number one, you need to take whatever
it is you're doing,
whether it's a read from URL operation,
or whatever, or whatever.
and wrap it into a block that
you pass to perform asynchronous
file access using block.
This is a method on UI document that
allows us to schedule your operation on
our background reading and writing queue,
which is where all reading
and writing needs to happen.
Additionally, you will need to use the
NSFileCoordinator API if you are doing
reads and writes initiated yourself,
rather than calling
our high-level methods,
open with completion
handler and save to URL.
Those methods do file
coordination for you,
which is necessary to have
safe reading and writing
relative to the iCloud daemon.
But if you're doing
these things yourself,
you need to use the
NSFileCoordination API,
which is also new in iOS 5.
And there was a talk on that,
taking advantage of file coordination,
also yesterday.
The video will be posted online.
I really encourage you to watch
that video if you at all are
in the situation where you're
needing to do file coordination.
So one of the things you can do
if you are in this world where you
need the fine-grained control and
you're going into this background
queue is incremental reading.
So if this is our diagram of how
the reading queue model works,
we're going to focus now finally
on that background queue and
give you your override point
for doing incremental reading.
This is actually a method that
you will call and override,
more than likely,
if you're doing incremental reading.
Read from URL with an error
returned by indirection.
The reason you will probably do both
is you'll want to override it so that
when OpenWithCompletionHandler executes,
we invoke your implementation
of read from URL,
your incremental implementation.
But then also, likely,
when you get to the point where
you want to do some more reads,
you're going to want to call
in directly to read from URL,
so you'll both override
it and invoke it yourself.
On the writing side,
you might want to have your
own definition of safe writing.
Well,
safe writing is something that UIKit,
UIDocument does on your behalf
any time we do a normal save.
Safe writing means, for us,
we write your data into an ancillary
file on the side of the actual file
URL that your document represents.
And when we've written all that data out,
we atomically copy it into place.
That's what safe writing means
by default for your iDocument.
But maybe this doesn't make
sense for your application,
and you want your own
definition of safe writing.
Or maybe you don't want to
participate in SafeWriting.
If that's the case,
the override point that we're
giving you is write contents
and attributes safely to URL.
And here you can do what makes sense for
your application in terms of SafeWriting,
if it's something other than
writing to an ancillary file,
or just skip SafeWriting
entirely and write directly
to the file in this method.
Something else that you might
be interested in is writing a
custom snapshot of your data.
If you want to do that,
you can leave write contents and
attributes safely to URL alone,
and let our default implementation
of that call another write method,
also on the background queue,
where you can have your override
point for writing a custom snapshot.
That override point is-- well,
the text is wrong here,
and I apologize for that.
That's the same method you saw before.
The actual method is just
write contents to URL.
I think it takes a save operation
parameter and an error by indirection,
and also the original file contents URL.
So you can look that method
up in the UI document header.
It's the one that doesn't
have safely in the name.
And that's your opportunity to
actually do the actual writing to disk.
If you return us something other than
an NSData type or an NSFileWrapper
type from contents for type,
then you're actually required
to override here so that you
can write that data to disk,
since we only know how to
do NSData and NSFileWrapper.
So one last thing I have in mind
that you might be interested
in is changing the file's type.
Some applications might
want to do this dynamically.
Their document class can actually
represent more than one type of file,
and that type could actually change
through the document's lifetime.
And we do have some overrides
to allow you to do that.
Example might be,
maybe you have a flat RTF file,
but then the user can
add an attachment to it,
and it becomes an RTFD file,
and then you need to dynamically
change the type of that document.
And so override that we're providing
for you there is saving file type.
We will call this at the beginning
of a save operation to determine what
type we should use for that save,
and you return us a uniform type
identifier as an NSString that
we'll use for that save.
We'll take that uniform type identifier,
turn around,
and call file name extension for type,
All right.
So that's what I wanted to talk to
you about with UI Document today.
Like to reiterate a few things.
Number one,
if there's anything I want you
to have in your head as you walk
out of here and go write your
first document-based applications,
it's really be simple.
Remember the demonstration that
we had where I was able to only
override two methods on UI Document,
load from contents and contents for type.
UI document is designed to
encourage you to use the simplest
parts of its API that you can.
And we have fine grained
controls for applications that
need to do specialized things.
But I really like you to look at doing
the simple things and using the simple
APIs first and only move to the advanced
ones if you find some specialized need
that you can't fill with the easy API.
It'll make your life easier.
It'll make your applications
developed more quickly.
And if you ever pass them
on to another developer,
they'll be able to
understand your code better.
So great advantages to keeping it simple.
Number two is don't forget to register
your changes with the document.
We love autosaving.
We love the saveless user model.
That's all driven by you
very simply telling us about
the changes that are made.
It's very easy to do this,
either calling our update change
count method or registering your
changes with the undo manager.
And after that, we're off and running.
and auto saving happens for you.
Finally, since this is what
UI Document is all about,
I want you to use iCloud.
UI Document was built for iCloud.
Users are going to love using iCloud.
And the premier applications on the
App Store are going to be ones that
allow the user to seamlessly have
their data across all of their devices.
So if you're building
Document applications in iOS 5,
you really should use iCloud.
And thankfully,
UI Document makes that incredibly easy.
Not really any specialized code
to handle UI document syncing.
But the one thing also to
remember when you are saying,
yes, I am going to integrate with iCloud,
is also, yes,
I need a conflict resolution strategy.
That may be using UI Manage Document.
That may be doing automatic merging.
God bless you if you do so.
Or it may be presenting things
to the user and letting them
figure it out for themselves.
But whatever it is, don't do nothing.
You don't want to leak data into
the user's iCloud storage account.
And you certainly don't want them to
have the appearance of a data loss
because they can't access versions that
have been conflicted away from them.
So that's UIDocument that's
storing documents in iCloud.
If you're interested
in some other sessions,
I mentioned a few,
taking advantage of file coordination,
what's new in Core Data on iOS,
and also there's an
iCloud Storage overview.
All of these sessions already happened,
so I apologize for that.
I will next time ask to be first.
And I really look forward to seeing the
great document-based applications you
all are going to be writing in iOS 5.
Thank you very much.